Title: Automating Novelty Detection in Large Chess Databases

The basic problem is:

(a) Given the record of moves in a game of chess, to find the earliest position p that is novel---i.e., has never appeared before in the entire recorded history of chess.

This problem is easy in principle.  Every chess position is specified by a so-called Forsyth-Edwards Notation (FEN) code. Databases on the order of 10 million games representing the history of chess are readily available.  An average game has about 35 moves by each player, hence 70 FEN codes of under 100 characters each, so even under naive encodings the database takes "only" 70 billion chars = 70GB.  We need only test each position code in a newly-presented game to find the first one that is not in the database of so-called "book" positions.

The problem becomes trickier under the following wrinkles, all of which are relevant to several prospective uses of the data---including automating the exclusion of "book moves" from statistical tests of allegations that human players have cheated by using a computer during games.  The World Chess Federation (FIDE from its French acronym) has had to deal with such allegations at an increasing rate since the scandal of the 2006 world championship match and a ramp-up of cases since 2010.  I am a regular advisor to FIDE's Anti-Cheating Commission and helped draft the ACC charter documents in 2013-14.

(b) We actually want the earliest position q such that q and all positions after q are outside of "book"---excepting positions toward the end of the game that are enumerated in a separate registry of "common endgame positions".  This q can differ from p because the given game might return to a book position b by a different order of moves than how b was arrived at in the past.

(c) We may further exclude from the "book" all moves by players under a specified skill threshold, such as 2300 on the Elo Rating scale used by FIDE.  This introduces the element of "move" besides "position" and requires formulating the idea of a chain of moves leading to q, each of which has been played by a sufficiently skilled player---though possibly in many different games.

The preeminent database tool in the chess world is ChessBase, marketed by ChessBase GMBH of Hamburg, Germany.  This provides only service (a) directly, (b) by hunt-and-peck sequentially through a game, and not (c) at all.  These two attempts to emulate (c) using ChessBase are incorrect: (i) Limiting to a database of all games between players both rated at least (say) 2300 misses the event that two games, one with only White being 2300+ and the other with only Black, could follow the same course of moves up to q.  (ii) Limiting to games with at least one player >= 2300 does not eradicate the central difficulty.  Moreover, several versions of ChessBase have been observed to show bugs on queries of type (a), let alone (b) or (c).

Abstractly, the project is trying to resolve the long-standing dichotomy between "position-based" and "moves-based" databases. In the 1980s and 1990s era of limited computing power, the difference in structure was palpable and hard to bridge.  Even more abstractly, we have a form of "alternating directed graph" and need to reconcile node-based and paths-based predicates. Optimizing the query time, as opposed to previous emphasis on conserving space via compact binary encodings, will be the driving objective.  It will be desirable to find a general solution that applies to other selection criteria besides Elo rating thresholds, so the mathematical nature of the problem will take precedence over chess-specific elements.

The project does not intend to automate the entire cheating-test process, nor host data private to FIDE.  It would constitute a public service that FIDE's private server could access. Implementing and testing an appropriate and standardizable communication protocol for such access is a second facet of the project.  To clarify: all data to be used by the project is indelibly in the public domain (recent court cases have affirmed that the record of moves is not copyrightable nor restrictable in other ways) and all data and data structures will be regenerable in case of catastrophic database corruption.  No AWS public datasets will be involved.  No private FIDE data will be resident on the AWS instances of this project.

In summary, the project's goals have been recognized as important to the chess world, but they have not been fully achieved with commodity individual-PC software.  Although the magnitudes of project elements are relatively small (measured in GB not TB), the scale needs a cloud environment for best advantage.   The project's design factors have a more general expression in the theory of directed graphs ("with alternation"), so that performance findings may have test relevance beyond the chess domain.  The database could be a springboard for statistical investigation of the graph structure of chess games.
